# Getting Help

While this manual aims to provide you with information about how to
get started, resources to learn more, and pointers to additional
sources of information, its entirely possible that you will encounter
a problem that you need help to solve.  Recognizing that a problem is
beyond your current skill level and seeking advice is the first step
on the path to being an expert in a topic.

There are several places that you can get help for components of the
Gizmo ecosystem.  Before you head off to these places, however, please
take a moment to review the information below on asking good
questions.

  * Don't ask an [XY Problem](https://xyproblem.info).  When you get
    stuck, its really easy to get stuck in the thought process of "If
    I could only figure out how to do X I could achieve Y."  This kind
    of thinking can lead to asking questions about X that are totally
    unrelated to Y.  When you ask a question, try to provide a clear
    description of what you want to achieve, not how you think you'll
    achieve it.

  * Clearly describe what you've tried so far.  There's a reason most
    technical support conversations start with asking if you've tried
    turning it off and back on again.  Simple solutions can fix a
    myriad of problems, so be sure to try some basic troubleshooting
    steps on your own first (check batteries, verify software, etc).
    When you ask your questions, this will help those answering to not
    waste your time with things you've already tried.

  * Describe the setup of your environment and your configuration.
    For hardware problems this is going to include at minimum a
    description of the exact fault.  The problem is never "it doesn't
    work" its always going to be more specific such as "a motor
    controller connected to port 2 doesn't seem to be able to go into
    reverse."  For software problems, be sure to include information
    about the versions you have installed, your operating system, code
    that you're trying to make work if applicable, and anything
    unusual not described in this manual that you may be trying.  Its
    also a good idea to see if you can replicate the problem in
    different configurations (does an earlier version of your program
    work, does it work on another computer, etc).

  * Ask your questions to the right people for the right problems.
    The Gizmo platform is made up of some custom components and a
    large number of Open Source components.  While the Gizmo team is
    happy to read any problems you send, we may need to point you to a
    more appropriate forum where other experts can provide you with
    more specialized help and support.  The sections below will
    describe the kinds of problems that you may encounter and where
    you'll get the best support.

## Gizmo Specific Problems

Gizmo specific problems are, we hope, extremely rare.  However just
like the rare sighting of a black swan, they do occur.  Problems that
are specific to the Gizmo platform include anything physically wrong
with a controller, any issues with the driver's console, and problems
with the `gizmo` tool.  For problems with the Gizmo itself, we make
use of GitHub Discussions which provides a forum experience.  You can
seek help in our forum
[here](https://github.com/gizmo-platform/gizmo/discussions).  Don't
worry if you don't know what category to post into, our team can
always move the thread if it fits better in a different category.

## Gizmo FMS Problems

Gizmo FMS problems are specific to the control and network layers of a
Gizmo enabled Field Management System (FMS).  If you are running a
competition, you will have been provided specific contact information
to use to receive real-time support with the FMS.  If you are planning
to run a competition and wish to engage this level of support, reach
out in the Gizmo forums above and we'll get you in touch with the
right people.

## Arduino IDE and Arduino Code

For issues with the Arduino experience that are not related to the
Gizmo library you may wish to go directly to the [Arduino
site](https://www.arduino.cc/).  There you'll find documentation on
the Arduino IDE, the language specificiation, all libraries that are
available, as well as information about the Arduino Forum and Discord
chat where you can talk to other people using Arduino to get help,
advice, or even just to learn from other projects people have built.

## Circuit Python

If you are programming your Gizmo with Circuit Python, a wealth of
knowledge and resources exist on the main [Circuit
Python](https://circuitpython.org/) website.  From this site you can
use the forums, join the Discord, or read tutorials that will expand
your understanding of the Circuit Python environment.
